% Conciousness is a gift of life
% Dilawar Singh
% A rebuttal of _Qualia and conciousness_ by Sandhya Bhatiya.

Since I know very little about the mechanisms of biology, I am going to rely
heavily on my sense rather than on biological _Shashtras_.

I find the author belief that that "property of being concious evolved over
time" is reasonable to start with. But her claim that conciousness "need not to
be present in the organisms which lie first on the evolutionary time scale"
strains my credulity; even when we only consider her definition of conciousness
-- that the conciousness is the "ability" to realise presence of self which
might include things like ...". This definition is quite wide in scope and
leaves too much for reader to anticipate. I'll take the "ability to realise the
presence of self" as the core feature of being concious in her definition.

If I were to build a theory about conciousness, I'd put my first axiom as
following. *Conciousness, like the ability to learn, is a gift of life.*

Her claim that it is absent in primitive life at some stage of evolution
contradicts it.

The presence of absence of conciousness has little to with "evolution" as such
which, I believe, adds small structures to a super-structure. The
super-structure might look totally different from what we have started with if
we let the long enough time to pass, but evolution surely does not create
something out of thin air.  Evolution can not bring about a fundamental change
as great as presence of conciousness if there was nothing to start with. I will
find it extremely surprising if it were to be proved that some of the life-forms
known to mankind do/did not know about their "presence". I am not even sure if
such a test which measure the ability of a living organism to realise the self
would ever be constructed. If a life form is not aware of "presence of self"
at the very beginning how can it survive, let alone evolving into something
complex and complicated?

The author is not on solid ground when she suggests that conciousness "needs not
be present in the organisms that lie first on the evolutionary time scale".
Author backs her thesis by citing a study by a neuroscientist (presumably). This
does not seem to be helping her case either. The study seem to suggest something
about the degree of conciousness and nothing about the presence or absence of
conciousness. Also it does not go well with the author another assertion that
there is "surely a physical basis of conciousness". Surely there is something
physical present in the most primitive form of life and that itself might
contain some conciousness, no matter how primitive we find it from our rather
privileged position of being both judge and jury.

